2026/index.md, before:

---
layout: default
hide_from_navbar: false
redirect_from:
  - /
title: 2026
---

# Sustainable Software Engineering 🌱
Edition of 2025/26<br/>
[MSc Computer Science] and [MSc Data Science and Artificial Intelligence Technology], [Delft University of Technology]

**! Page for 2026 edition is still work in progress !**


**Sustainable Software Engineering** is an overarching discipline that addresses the long-term consequences of designing, building, and releasing a software project.
By definition, sustainability covers five main perspectives: **environmental**, **social**, **individual**, economic, technical.
This course focuses on the first three.

![Sustainability Domains](../assets//img/domains.svg){: style="display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto" width="260px" }

Software Engineering (SE) has long addressed sustainability by **narrowing it down to economical and technical sustainability**.
However, our society is facing major sustainability challenges that can no longer be overlooked by software engineers and computer scientists.
It was estimated that, **by 2040, the ICT sector will contribute to 14% of the global carbon footprint**. Hence, environmental, social, and individual ought to be part of the equation when it comes to design, build, and release software systems.
The problem is far from simple, but **we need expert computer scientists** to bring sustainability into the core values of the next generation of tech-leading organisations.

This course covers a set of competencies needed to leverage sustainable software systems.
It has a **strong component on Green SE**, covering techniques to measure and improve the energy-efficiency at any stage of the software lifecycle.
Students learn **state-of-the-art practices on energy efficiency** and apply them in real software projects. Moreover, the course will cover core principles of **empirical software engineering**, and **social and individual sustainability**.

## Organisation

-------|----------|
**Course code**       | [CS4575]
**Brightspace 🔒**    | [Brightspace]
**Instructors**       | [Luís Cruz], [Carolin Brandt], [Enrique Barba Roque]
**Schedule**          |	Mondays 8:45, Wednesdays 8:45, Thursdays 10:45. 🔗 [MyTimetable].
**Mattermost**        | [Sign Up Link](https://mattermost.tudelft.nl/signup_user_complete/?id=8yeqaxyhyprdzx1aq38qubjsjo).
**ECTS** 	            | 5.0
**Quarter**           | Q3
**Format**            | Classes are optimised for in-person attendance.
**Examination type**  | Group Project 1 (40%); Group Project 2 (60%).
**Target audience**   |	Students of the [MSc Computer Science] and the [MSc Data Science and Artificial Intelligence Technology].
**Requirements** 	    | - Intermediate understanding of OOP languages;<br/> - Basic understanding of data analysis techniques.

[CS4575]:https://www.studiegids.tudelft.nl/a101_displayCourse.do?course_id=70145


## Learning Objectives

By the end of this course you will be able to:

- LO1. Explain the fundamental sustainability principles and their relevance to software engineering.
- LO2. Assess the energy consumption of software systems using measurement and testing techniques.
- LO3. Create actionable strategies to address sustainability issues within software organisations.
- LO4. Evaluate solutions for sustainable software systems based on their effectiveness in achieving sustainability goals and their potential impact on various stakeholders.

## Outline

**⚠️ Please note:** The following outline is subject to changes; Recordings are available through Collegerama. Please refer to the timetable for times and up-to-date lecture locations.

![Course Schedule Overview](../assets//img/schedule-sse-2026.png){: style="display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto" width="660px" }

| Week | Day | Date                  | Summary                                                                                                               | Slides               |
|------|-----|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| 1    | Mon | 09-02-2026            | **Lecture.** Course introduction. Sustainable Software: What, Why and How.                                            | [📊Slides][tbd]  |
| 1    | Wed | 11-02-2026            | **Lecture.** Social and Individual Sustainability.                                                                    | [📊Slides][tbd]  |
| 1    | Thu | 12-02-2026            | **Lab.** Measuring software energy consumption. Introduction to [Project 1](#project1).                               | [📊Slides][tbd]  |
| 2    | Mon | 16-02-2026            | **Lecture.** Green Software Engineering — Part I: Scientific guide for reliable energy measurements.                  | [📊Slides][tbd]  |
| 2    | Wed | 18-02-2026            | **Lecture.** Green Software Engineering — Part II: units of energy.                                                   | [📊Slides][tbd]  |
| 2    | Thu | 19-02-2026            | **Project.** [Project 1](#project1) - steering meeting and formative assessment.                                      |                      |
| 3    | Mon | 23-02-2026            | **Lecture.** Green Software Engineering — Part III: Energy efficiency in mobile computing; carbon-aware data centres. | [📊Slides][tbd]  |
| 3    | Wed | 25-02-2026            | **Guest Lecture.** GreenPT                                                                                            |                      |
| 3    | Thu | 26-02-2026            | **Project.** [Project 1](#project1) - steering meeting.                                                               |                      |
| 3    | Fri | 27-02-2026            | ⏰ Deadline for [Project 1](#project1) Friday, Feb 27.                                                                |                      |
| 4    | Mon | 02-03-2026            | **Lecture.** Green AI.                                                                                                | [📊Slides][tbd]  |
| 4    | Wed | 04-03-2026            | **Hands-on Workshop.** Sustainability Awareness Framework                                                             | [📊Workbook][tbd] |
| 4    | Thu | 05-03-2026            | **Project.** [Project 2](#project2) - Workshop Topics                                                                 |                      |
| 5    |     |                       | **Project 2 - steering meeting 1.**                                                                                   |                      |
| 6    |     |                       | **Project 2 - steering meeting 2.**                                                                                   |                      |
| 7    |     |                       | **Project 2 - steering meeting 3.**                                                                                   |                      |
| 8    |     |                       | **Project 2 - steering meeting 4.**                                                                                   |                      |
| 8    | Thu | 02-04-2026            | ⏰ Submission Deadline [Project 2](#project2) – April 2.                                                              |                      |
| 9    | Tue/Wed | 07-04-2026/08-04-2026 | Presentations + Q&A [Project 2](#project2) – April 7 + 8.                                                         |                      |
 
## Assignments

Below the description of each project.

### 🛠 **Project 1** – Measuring Software Energy Consumption
{: #project1}

- Goal: Compare energy consumption in common software use cases.
  - Examples:
    - Different versions of the same app;
      - Same use case but different apps
      - Same version, same app, but different user settings (e.g., enable/disable GPU optimisation)
      - Same version, same app, but different running environment
- Blog-style report (markdown, approx 2500 words).
  - Bonus if you can automate the experiment and there is a replication package.
- [Submission by pull request to the website. Instructions for Project 1 here](/course_sustainableSE/2026/p1_measuring_software/).
  - Blog-style report (markdown, approx 2500 words).
  - Replication package.
- **Weight in final grade**: 40%
- **Deadline** Friday, Feb 28



### 🛠 **Project 2** – Hacking Sustainability
{: #project2}

- **Goal:** Solve a Sustainable Software Engineering problem.
  - Identify/Describe 1 problem that should be fixed to help enabling sustainability in the software engineering industry/community. You can reuse ideas from the slides.
  - Propose a solution. It can be a tool, framework, guidelines, etc.
  - Implement the solution.
  - Validation. (Depending on the idea)
  - Dissemination/social impact. (E.g., solution should be open source, welcome contributors, post on social media, tool website, available in package managers, etc.)
- **Steering meeting/formative assessments**: Every week from week 5 to 8.
- [Submission by pull request to the website. Instructions for Project 2 here](/course_sustainableSE/2026/p2_hacking_sustainability/).
  - **Deliverables.**
    - Paper-like article. (Min 4 pages, max 10)
    - Online git repo with open source codebase and/or replication package.
    - 3 minute vertical video as presentation + 5 min Q&A
- **Weight in final grade**: 60%
- **Deadline** Thursday, April 2, 2026
  - Paper + Artifact Submission (via pull request)
  - Video Submission (via Brightspace)
  - Presentation & Q&A: Tuesday & Wednesday, April 7 and 8.



## Further reading (optional)

- Cruz, L., de Bekker, P. (2023) [All you need to know about Energy Metrics in Software Engineering](https://luiscruz.github.io/2023/05/13/energy-units.html).
- Wohlin, C., Runeson, P., Höst, M., Ohlsson, M. C., Regnell, B., & Wesslén, A. (2012). Experimentation in software engineering. Springer Science & Business Media.
- Cruz, L., & Abreu, R. (2017, May). Performance-based guidelines for energy efficient mobile applications. In 2017 IEEE/ACM 4th International Conference on Mobile Software Engineering and Systems (MOBILESoft) (pp. 46-57). IEEE.
- Cruz, L., & Abreu, R. (2019). [Catalog of energy patterns for mobile applications](https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.03302). Empirical Software Engineering, 24(4), 2209-2235.
- Stol, K. J., & Fitzgerald, B. (2018). The ABC of software engineering research. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM), 27(3), 1-51.
- Spinellis, Diomidis (2017). [The Social Responsibility of Software Development](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7888390). IEEE Software.

## Interesting pointers

- [EnergiBridge](https://github.com/tdurieux/energibridge) - Tool to measure energy consumption from almost any device.
- [Principles of Sustainable Software Engineering](https://principles.green)
- [CAT community](https://ClimateAction.tech)
- [Energy Patterns for Mobile Apps](https://tqrg.github.io/energy-patterns/).
- [Branch Magazine](https://branch.climateaction.tech).
- [Green Software Lab](https://greenlab.di.uminho.pt)
- [Website Carbon Calculator](https://www.websitecarbon.com)
- [Carbon Tracker](https://github.com/lfwa/carbontracker)
- [Greenpeace — Europe's Green Recovery As if the planet mattered](https://www.greenpeace.de/sites/www.greenpeace.de/files/publications/20201022_greenrecovery_f_es.pdf)
- [Green TU](https://www.tudelft.nl/sustainability/get-involved/greentu/)

[Delft University of Technology]: https://www.tudelft.nl
[MSc Computer Science]: https://www.tudelft.nl/onderwijs/opleidingen/masters/cs/msc-computer-science
[MSc Data Science and Artificial Intelligence Technology]: https://www.tudelft.nl/onderwijs/opleidingen/masters/dsait/msc-data-science-and-artificial-intelligence-technology
[Luís Cruz]: https://luiscruz.github.io
[Carolin Brandt]: https://carolin-brandt.de
[Enrique Barba Roque]: https://ebarba.com
[CS4575]: https://www.studiegids.tudelft.nl/courses/study-guide/educations/14777
[Brightspace]: https://brightspace.tudelft.nl/d2l/home/774591

[Nergis Tömen]:https://www.tudelft.nl/ewi/over-de-faculteit/afdelingen/intelligent-systems/pattern-recognition-bioinformatics/computer-vision-lab/people/nergis-toemen

[MyTimetable]: https://mytimetable.tudelft.nl/link?timetable.id=TimeEdit!timeedit_module!INJTINBRGU

<!-- [slides01]:
[slides02]:
[slides03]:
[slides04]:
[susafwb]: 
[slides05]:
[slides07]:
[slides08]:
[slides10]:
[slides11]: -->

Commit message:

update 2026 and add some more ofthe deadlines from Brightspace to the website

2026/index.md, after:

---
layout: default
hide_from_navbar: false
redirect_from:
  - /
title: 2026
---

# Sustainable Software Engineering 🌱
Edition of 2025/26<br/>
[MSc Computer Science] and [MSc Data Science and Artificial Intelligence Technology], [Delft University of Technology]

**Sustainable Software Engineering** is an overarching discipline that addresses the long-term consequences of designing, building, and releasing a software project.
By definition, sustainability covers five main perspectives: **environmental**, **social**, **individual**, economic, technical.
This course focuses on the first three.

![Sustainability Domains](../assets//img/domains.svg){: style="display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto" width="260px" }

Software Engineering (SE) has long addressed sustainability by **narrowing it down to economical and technical sustainability**.
However, our society is facing major sustainability challenges that can no longer be overlooked by software engineers and computer scientists.
It was estimated that, **by 2040, the ICT sector will contribute to 14% of the global carbon footprint**. Hence, environmental, social, and individual ought to be part of the equation when it comes to design, build, and release software systems.
The problem is far from simple, but **we need expert computer scientists** to bring sustainability into the core values of the next generation of tech-leading organisations.

This course covers a set of competencies needed to leverage sustainable software systems.
It has a **strong component on Green SE**, covering techniques to measure and improve the energy-efficiency at any stage of the software lifecycle.
Students learn **state-of-the-art practices on energy efficiency** and apply them in real software projects. Moreover, the course will cover core principles of **empirical software engineering**, and **social and individual sustainability**.

## Organisation

-------|----------|
**Course code**       | [CS4575]
**Brightspace 🔒**    | [Brightspace]
**Instructors**       | [Luís Cruz], [Carolin Brandt], [Enrique Barba Roque]
**Schedule**          |	Mondays 8:45, Wednesdays 8:45, Thursdays 10:45. 🔗 [MyTimetable].
**Mattermost**        | [Sign Up Link](https://mattermost.tudelft.nl/signup_user_complete/?id=8yeqaxyhyprdzx1aq38qubjsjo).
**ECTS** 	            | 5.0
**Quarter**           | Q3
**Format**            | Classes are optimised for in-person attendance.
**Examination type**  | Group Project 1 (40%); Group Project 2 (60%).
**Target audience**   |	Students of the [MSc Computer Science] and the [MSc Data Science and Artificial Intelligence Technology].
**Requirements** 	    | - Intermediate understanding of OOP languages;<br/> - Basic understanding of data analysis techniques.

[CS4575]:https://www.studiegids.tudelft.nl/a101_displayCourse.do?course_id=70145


## Learning Objectives

By the end of this course you will be able to:

- LO1. Explain the fundamental sustainability principles and their relevance to software engineering.
- LO2. Assess the energy consumption of software systems using measurement and testing techniques.
- LO3. Create actionable strategies to address sustainability issues within software organisations.
- LO4. Evaluate solutions for sustainable software systems based on their effectiveness in achieving sustainability goals and their potential impact on various stakeholders.

## Outline

**⚠️ Please note:** The following outline is subject to changes; Recordings are available through Collegerama. Please refer to the timetable for times and up-to-date lecture locations.

![Course Schedule Overview](../assets//img/schedule-sse-2026.png){: style="display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto" width="660px" }

| Week | Day | Date                  | Summary                                                                                                               | Slides               |
|------|-----|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| 1    | Mon | 09-02-2026            | **Lecture.** Course introduction. Sustainable Software: What, Why and How.                                            | [📊Slides][tbd]  |
| 1    | Wed | 11-02-2026            | **Lecture.** Social and Individual Sustainability.                                                                    | [📊Slides][tbd]  |
| 1    | Thu | 12-02-2026            | **Lab.** Measuring software energy consumption. Introduction to [Project 1](#project1).                               | [📊Slides][tbd]  |
| 2    | Mon | 16-02-2026            | **Lecture.** Green Software Engineering — Part I: Scientific guide for reliable energy measurements.                  | [📊Slides][tbd]  |
| 2    | Wed | 18-02-2026            | **Lecture.** Green Software Engineering — Part II: units of energy.                                                   | [📊Slides][tbd]  |
| 2    | Thu | 19-02-2026            | **Project.** [Project 1](#project1) - steering meeting and formative assessment.                                      |                      |
| 3    | Mon | 23-02-2026            | **Lecture.** Green Software Engineering — Part III: Energy efficiency in mobile computing; carbon-aware data centres. | [📊Slides][tbd]  |
| 3    | Wed | 25-02-2026            | **Guest Lecture.** GreenPT                                                                                            |                      |
| 3    | Thu | 26-02-2026            | **Project.** [Project 1](#project1) - steering meeting.                                                               |                      |
| 3    | Fri | 27-02-2026            | ⏰ Deadline for [Project 1](#project1) Friday, Feb 27.                                                                |                      |
| 4    | Mon | 02-03-2026            | **Lecture.** Green AI.                                                                                                | [📊Slides][tbd]  |
| 4    | Wed | 04-03-2026            | **Hands-on Workshop.** Sustainability Awareness Framework                                                             | [📊Workbook][tbd] |
| 4    | Thu | 05-03-2026            | **Project.** [Project 2](#project2) - Workshop Topics                                                                 |                      |
| 5    |     |                       | **Project 2 - steering meeting 1.**                                                                                   |                      |
| 6    |     |                       | **Project 2 - steering meeting 2.**                                                                                   |                      |
| 7    |     |                       | **Project 2 - steering meeting 3.**                                                                                   |                      |
| 8    |     |                       | **Project 2 - steering meeting 4.**                                                                                   |                      |
| 8    | Thu | 02-04-2026            | ⏰ Submission Deadline [Project 2](#project2) – April 2.                                                              |                      |
| 9    | Tue/Wed | 07-04-2026/08-04-2026 | Presentations + Q&A [Project 2](#project2) – April 7 + 8.                                                         |                      |
 
## Assignments

Below the description of each project.

### 🛠 **Project 1** – Measuring Software Energy Consumption
{: #project1}

- Goal: Compare energy consumption in common software use cases.
  - Examples:
    - Different versions of the same app;
      - Same use case but different apps
      - Same version, same app, but different user settings (e.g., enable/disable GPU optimisation)
      - Same version, same app, but different running environment
- Blog-style report (markdown, approx 2500 words).
  - Bonus if you can automate the experiment and there is a replication package.
- Groups of 4, randomly assigned. **Sign up to our Brightspace course until Feb 9 to be assigned a group**
- [Submission by pull request to the website. Instructions for Project 1 here](/course_sustainableSE/2026/p1_measuring_software/).
  - **Deadline for initial pull request with topic description:** Feb 12
  - Blog-style report (markdown, approx 2500 words).
  - Replication package.
  - Buddycheck for P1 (via Brightspace)
- **Weight in final grade**: 40%
- **Deadline** Friday, Feb 28



### 🛠 **Project 2** – Hacking Sustainability
{: #project2}

- **Goal:** Solve a Sustainable Software Engineering problem.
  - Identify/Describe 1 problem that should be fixed to help enabling sustainability in the software engineering industry/community. You can reuse ideas from the slides.
  - Propose a solution. It can be a tool, framework, guidelines, etc.
  - Implement the solution.
  - Validation. (Depending on the idea)
  - Dissemination/social impact. (E.g., solution should be open source, welcome contributors, post on social media, tool website, available in package managers, etc.)
- Groups of 5, self-chosen. Join the Workshop in Week 4 to find / finalize your group and topic idea.
- **Steering meeting/formative assessments**: Every week from week 5 to 8.
- [Submission by pull request to the website. Instructions for Project 2 here](/course_sustainableSE/2026/p2_hacking_sustainability/).
  - **Deadline for initial pull request with topic description:** Mar 5
  - **Deliverables in final submission.**
    - Paper-like article. (Min 4 pages, max 10)
    - Online git repo with open source codebase and/or replication package.
    - 3 minute vertical video as presentation + 5 min Q&A
- **Weight in final grade**: 60%
- **Deadline** Thursday, April 2, 2026
  - Paper + Artifact Submission (via pull request)
  - Video Submission (via Brightspace)
  - Buddychcek for P2 (via Brightspace)
  - Presentation & Q&A: Tuesday & Wednesday, Apr 7 and 8.



## Further reading (optional)

- Cruz, L., de Bekker, P. (2023) [All you need to know about Energy Metrics in Software Engineering](https://luiscruz.github.io/2023/05/13/energy-units.html).
- Wohlin, C., Runeson, P., Höst, M., Ohlsson, M. C., Regnell, B., & Wesslén, A. (2012). Experimentation in software engineering. Springer Science & Business Media.
- Cruz, L., & Abreu, R. (2017, May). Performance-based guidelines for energy efficient mobile applications. In 2017 IEEE/ACM 4th International Conference on Mobile Software Engineering and Systems (MOBILESoft) (pp. 46-57). IEEE.
- Cruz, L., & Abreu, R. (2019). [Catalog of energy patterns for mobile applications](https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.03302). Empirical Software Engineering, 24(4), 2209-2235.
- Stol, K. J., & Fitzgerald, B. (2018). The ABC of software engineering research. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM), 27(3), 1-51.
- Spinellis, Diomidis (2017). [The Social Responsibility of Software Development](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7888390). IEEE Software.

## Interesting pointers

- [EnergiBridge](https://github.com/tdurieux/energibridge) - Tool to measure energy consumption from almost any device.
- [Principles of Sustainable Software Engineering](https://principles.green)
- [CAT community](https://ClimateAction.tech)
- [Energy Patterns for Mobile Apps](https://tqrg.github.io/energy-patterns/).
- [Branch Magazine](https://branch.climateaction.tech).
- [Green Software Lab](https://greenlab.di.uminho.pt)
- [Website Carbon Calculator](https://www.websitecarbon.com)
- [Carbon Tracker](https://github.com/lfwa/carbontracker)
- [Greenpeace — Europe's Green Recovery As if the planet mattered](https://www.greenpeace.de/sites/www.greenpeace.de/files/publications/20201022_greenrecovery_f_es.pdf)
- [Green TU](https://www.tudelft.nl/sustainability/get-involved/greentu/)

[Delft University of Technology]: https://www.tudelft.nl
[MSc Computer Science]: https://www.tudelft.nl/onderwijs/opleidingen/masters/cs/msc-computer-science
[MSc Data Science and Artificial Intelligence Technology]: https://www.tudelft.nl/onderwijs/opleidingen/masters/dsait/msc-data-science-and-artificial-intelligence-technology
[Luís Cruz]: https://luiscruz.github.io
[Carolin Brandt]: https://carolin-brandt.de
[Enrique Barba Roque]: https://ebarba.com
[CS4575]: https://www.studiegids.tudelft.nl/courses/study-guide/educations/14777
[Brightspace]: https://brightspace.tudelft.nl/d2l/home/774591

[Nergis Tömen]:https://www.tudelft.nl/ewi/over-de-faculteit/afdelingen/intelligent-systems/pattern-recognition-bioinformatics/computer-vision-lab/people/nergis-toemen

[MyTimetable]: https://mytimetable.tudelft.nl/link?timetable.id=TimeEdit!timeedit_module!INJTINBRGU

<!-- [slides01]:
[slides02]:
[slides03]:
[slides04]:
[susafwb]: 
[slides05]:
[slides07]:
[slides08]:
[slides10]:
[slides11]: -->
