2025/p1_measuring_software/g25_spotify.md, before:

---
author: Julian Hirschler, Patrick Krumpl, Shantanu Jare, Sven Butzelaar, Thomas Verwaal
title: "Native vs. Web: Analyzing the Energy Consumption of Spotify Apps"
image: "https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/26/Spotify_logo_with_text.svg"
date: 28/02/2025
summary: |-
---
<!-- TODO: write abstract -->

# Introduction
The way music is consumed and distributed has changed dramatically over the past few decades. The rise of digital streaming platforms such as Spotify has transformed music into an on-demand service, replacing the need to purchase physical products such as CDs or vinyl. [^music_industry_shift] 

Today, streaming generates over 67% of global music revenues [^global_music_report], confirming its dominance in the industry. With 675 million monthly active users [^spotify_report] and a market share of over 30% [^streaming_stats], Spotify is the clear leader in the music streaming market. While this shift has made music more accessible than ever, it also poses questions about its environmental impact, since streaming requires a service provider, constant network data transmission, and device power.

In recent years, web-based streaming has become more and more popular as it eliminates the need for users to install additional applications on their devices. While web applications are often favoured for their accessibility and convenience, desktop applications often offer more features to the user. In this article, we compare the energy consumption of Spotify's web and desktop applications. By analysing these differences, we aim to provide valuable insights to help users make better decisions about their streaming habits.


<!-- TODO: We could add plots of the timeline -->
# Methodology
This chapter describes the methodology used to compare the energy consumption of Spotify's web and desktop applications. It covers the design of the experiment and how the experiment itself was conducted, including the automation and setup of the experiment.

## Design of the experiment
The first thing to do before conducting the experiment is to design it. This involves identifying a specific use case for the application, in our case Spotify's web and desktop application. It is also important to design the experiment in such a way that it mimics actual user behaviour and is realistic.

First, we designed and conducted an experiment with both applications (desktop and web) open at the same time. We switched between the windows and randomly played exactly one song in each test run. However, the disadvantage of this type of experiment was that the other window that was open in the background affected the accuracy of the measurement. Also, playing a random song for each run has an effect on energy consumption. Thus, the data were not really normally distributed. The result of this first experiment can be found in the chapter [Results  from initial setup without closing and opening (web)app](#results-initial-setup-without-closing-and-opening-webapp).

The aim in designing the revised experiment was to minimise any bias from other applications and to focus only on the application being run. In addition, we still wanted to play more than one song to mimic realistic user behaviour, but we also wanted the data to be normally distributed across the experiment. So we had to design the individual runs to be similar, but with a certain degree of randomness built in.

For the final experiment, we decided to have 30 runs per application. The runs themselves are randomly mixed. For a single run, we first open the application (i.e. web or desktop). We then wait a few seconds for the application to fully load so that the opening has no effect on the energy measurement. We did not want to include the start of the application in this measurement as we only wanted to focus on the use case of playing music. Next, the energy measurement is started and four songs are played in random order. Each song is played for 20 seconds. Including the delays for starting and searching for the songs, a run takes about 2 minutes. After the run, the application is closed and we pause for 1 minute. So the whole experiment takes about 3 hours.


## Experiment setup
In general, testing the power consumption of applications is difficult because multiple runs can give different results. For this reason, we have chosen to perform 30 runs per application. However, there are several other factors that can affect the measurement. To reduce any bias as much as possible, we did the following before starting the experiment:

- Let the device run for at least one hour to warm it up.
- Charge the device's battery to 100% and plug it in.
- Close all applications (except the console running the automated test script).
- Disable all unnecessary background services (e.g. cloud sync, software updater, ...).
- Turn off all notifications.
- Ensure that no additional hardware is connected to the device (e.g. remove USB mouse).
- Establish a stable internet connection - preferably a wired connection.
- Turn off automatic brightness.
- Disable any power-saving modes on the device.
- Log in to the Spotify desktop and web application beforehand and ensure that the volume in both applications is set to 100%. Close applications before starting the experiment.
- Ensure that the room temperature remains approximately the same throughout the experiment.


## Experiment execution
Since it would be impossible to manually run 60 experiments without introducing bias from user input, we automated the testing process using a _Python_ script. The Spotify apps are mostly controlled via keyboard shortcuts using the _pyautogui_ library. The energy measurements are done using [EnergiBridge](https://github.com/tdurieux/EnergiBridge), which is a cross-platform energy measurement utility.[^energi_bridge]

The script starts with an initialisation and warm-up phase before actually running the experiments. During this phase, the brightness of the display and the volume of the speakers are automatically adjusted. To warm up, a simple Fibonacci sequence is computed for three minutes. Afterwards, the experiment is run as described in the [Design of the experiment](#design-of-the-experiment) chapter.

## Replication
To replicate this experiment, check out our public [GitHub repository](https://github.com/famulenz-pkrumpl/SSE_Spotify). It contains all the necessary scripts as well as instructions on how to set up the experiment.[^sse_github_repo]


# Hardware setup

For our comparison, we used the following two software applications:

| Software                     | Version        |
|------------------------------|----------------|
| Spotify - Music and Podcasts | 1.257.463.0    |
| Google Chrome                | 133.0.6943.128 |

The experiments were conducted on a DELL XPS 15 9560 with 16GB RAM and Windows 10 Pro Version 22H2.

### Hardware Settings
To have consistent experiment results, our test script automatically set the brightness and the volume of the system to the level specified in the `.env` file.
Our hardware settings were as follows:

 - Brightness 50%
 - Volume 10%
 - Internet connection via Wifi
 - Google Chrome was used as the browser


### Spotify Settings
To make sure, the experiments are as consistent as possible we adjusted the following settings in the Spotify native app:

 - Auto adjust quality should be disabled
 - Streaming quality: Normal
 - Download [quality]: Normal
 - Clear cache

And these settings should be *ENABLED* at both, the native and the web app:

 - Show the now-playing panel on click of play
 - Display short, looping visuals on tracks (Canvas)

### Spotify Accounts
For our experiment, we used two separate Spotify accounts, one for the native app and one for the web app.
This was done to prevent previously saved songs from being displayed and interfering with the experiment.
It is also important to use a non-premium Spotify account for the experiments because the audio quality of premium accounts is higher and thus, more energy will be consumed ([more information](#limitations-and-issues)).





# Results 

## Results in initial setup without closing and opening (web)app
As discussed in the methodology, our initial approach was to keep the app and the web browser open during all experiments. The results, as can be seen in Figure 1 show a plot without a normal distribution. We assume that the results with a lower energy consumption might have benefitted from internal cashing. This led us to change our setup to open and close the (web)app for every run.

![Violin Plot](../img/p1_measuring_software/g25_spotify/box_without_closing_setup.png)
*Figure 1: Violin and Box plots of energy consumption (J) without outliers.*

## Results improved setup
### Violin and Box Plots and Outliers Removal
We have plotted the data[^github] collected from the experiment into two violin and box plots, as can be seen in Figure 2. It is clear from the plots that both the results for the web and native version contain outliers. We used the Shapiro-Wilk test to check if our results are normal, the results from this test can be seen in Table 1. The p-values for the web version (2.1 × 10<sup>-8</sup>) and for the native version (5.0 × 10<sup>-4</sup>) reported by the Shapiro-Wilk are smaller than 0.05 and thus the data is not normally distributed. We therefore used z-score outlier removal to remove outliers, we had to apply this twice before the p-value of the Shapiro-Wilk test was larger than 0.05, as can be seen in Table 2. The violin and box plots for the data without outliers can be seen in Figure 3. We removed three data points, two from the web version (129.5J and 788.4J) and one from the native version (814.3J).

![Violin Plot](../img/p1_measuring_software/g25_spotify/box_outliers.png)
*Figure 2: Violin and Box plots of energy consumption (J) with outliers.*

| Shapiro-Wilk            	| W      	| p-value     	|
|-------------------------	|--------	|-------------	|
| With outliers web       	| 0.5549 	| 2.1 * 10<sup>-8</sup> 	|
| With outliers native    	| 0.8456 	| 5.0 * 10<sup>-4</sup> 	|
| Without outliers web    	| 0.9573 	| 0.3002      	|
| Without outliers native 	| 0.9882 	| 0.9809      	|

*Table 1: Values reported by Shapiro-Wilk with and without outliers.*

![Violin Plot](../img/p1_measuring_software/g25_spotify/box_no_outliers.png)
*Figure 3: Violin and Box plots of energy consumption (J) without outliers.*

### Welch's t_test and Significance
To determine the significance of our results we used Welch’s t-test, which reported a t-statistic of -9.3 and a p-value of 3.21 × 10<sup>-12</sup>. Since p < 0.05 we conclude that there is a statistically significant difference. From the t-statistic, we conclude that the native version consumes significantly more energy.

### Effect Size
To get an insight into the effect size of our experiments we computed multiple values, including the average difference, per cent change and Cohan's d, these can be seen in Table 2.

|                	| Web   	| Native 	| Difference 	|
|----------------	|-------	|--------	|------------	|
| Minimum value  	| 572.4 	| 653.2  	| 80.8       	|
| Maximum value  	| 711.4 	| 741.2  	| 29.8       	|
| Average        	| 625.3 	| 692.7  	| 67.4       	|
| Percent change 	|       	|        	| 10.78%     	|
| Cohan's d      	|       	|        	| 2.4        	|

*Table 2: Effect size analysis.*

# Discussion
The first interesting data point that can be observed is the higher energy consumption in the native desktop version of around 10.78%. There could be several reasons for this firstly, the Spotify native desktop application has many more features when compared to the web app. Some of these features are a higher audio quality, an offline mode which might require additional processing and an equalizer which leads to additional processing overhead[^spotify_WebApp_vs_Native]. In addition, the desktop version of Spotify uses a cache which further increases the energy consumption. The difference in peak power consumption is 29.8 J. This suggests that under peak workloads the power consumption is similar despite the desktop version having more features. This also ties in with the higher baseline or minimum power consumption of the native desktop by 80.8 J. This implies that these additional features require background processes to run even when the song is not played which consumes additional energy. The Android version of the app which was tested against the web version on the same mobile platform performed with better energy efficiency.  [^Android_vs_WebApp]
<!-- TODO: Mention that the desktop version has more features than the web versions, which might consume more energy. But the desktop version has caching, which does not improve it -->

<!-- TODO: also mention the paper https://www.ivanomalavolta.com/files/papers/MOBILESoft_2023.pdf and mention that on Android, it is opposite -->

# Limitations and Issues
The experiment methodology has a few issues such as being unable to cover all the use cases. The experiment only collects data for a maximum of 2 minutes per data point but this can be increased to around 5-10 minutes. The native and the web app versions have different audio qualities, video playback, and UI which might affect measurements. The used energy of the application depends a lot on the quality of the audio stream. This quality depends on various factors; one of them is the quality setting of the native app. In our experiments, we set it to *Normal*, corresponding to an AAC bitrate of approximately 96 kbit/s. It is not possible to adjust the audio quality in the web app, which means the music will be played with an AAC bitrate of 128 kbit/s for non-premium Spotify accounts and 256 kbit/s for premium accounts.[^spotify_audio_quality]

Another issue with testing the web app version was that it was done only on one browser and operating system. It could be the case that the native app runs more efficiently on a different operating system and architecture. This method also doesn't identify which features or which processes are consuming the most energy in the web app. This is a more useful insight for developing a more sustainable software product.

Furthermore not all use cases are covered in our experiments. The native app, in particular, offers more configuration options, which may further impact the results. For example, offline mode is not considered in our experiments. This mode could lead to lower energy consumption since no data transfer is required.The native app also lacks the option to turn off caching. This eventually leads to automatic downloads of some music and therefore, less data needs to be transferred and the energy consumption may decrease.

# Conclusion
Few findings can be concluded from this study. Firstly the efficiency of native desktops isn't always guaranteed over web apps on browsers such as Chrome. This is clearly shown by the results of this study. Feature availability and the presence of background jobs in desktop applications make an application like Spotify which relies on these more inefficient in its native desktop form. However, considering the difference in the peak power consumption was not very different it could be said barring these factors of higher quality and a more feature-rich environment the desktop is still pretty efficient at providing peak usage with similar energy consumption. The downside is only the resources consumed during the idling or the lower intense workloads in which case the web app is more efficient. However, this could be a more interesting case to further examine.


# Future Work
<!-- TODO: what could maybe be added here: compare more use cases, compare different browsers, compare different settings for audio quality, disable video, ...-->

---
The future work would involve looking at covering more use cases of the Spotify app. This would involve testing different features within the app and how they affect the energy consumption both in the native vs web app version. In addition for different video qualities, the energy consumption of the native vs Web App can be compared. This can be extended for different browsers as well. In addition to this comparing different desktop versions of Spotify across different operating systems and architectures can be done as well. Other similar music players such as Apple Music / Youtube Music can be examined to see how well they perform in terms of energy consumption when compared to Spotify. The song selection could also be improved currently a single song is being tested for 2 minutes. The better approach would involve testing for longer periods with songs from multiple genres. The user experience between Spotify's desktop and web app versions can be collected to see if it is worth the extra energy. Spotify might consider removing features that very few users use that might be consuming a lot of energy in the desktop or web app. The network connection also affects the energy consumption so using a web app with wired internet/wifi.
[^music_industry_shift]: [An Economic Analysis of the Effects of Streaming on the Music Industry in Response to Criticism from Taylor Swift](https://scholarworks.uni.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?params=/context/mtie/article/1154/&path_info=05_Zehr_music_streaming.pdf)
[^global_music_report]: [IFPI - Global Music Report](https://www.ifpi.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/04/GMR_2024_State_of_the_Industry.pdf)
[^spotify_report]: [2024 Earnings](https://newsroom.spotify.com/2025-02-04/spotify-reports-fourth-quarter-2024-earnings/?utm_source=chatgpt.com)
[^streaming_stats]: [Music Streaming Services Stats (2025)](https://explodingtopics.com/blog/music-streaming-stats)

[^energi_bridge]: [EnergiBridge GitHub](https://github.com/tdurieux/EnergiBridge)
[^sse_github_repo]: [GitHub repository with source code of experiment](https://github.com/famulenz-pkrumpl/SSE_Spotify)

[^spotify_WebApp_vs_Native]: [Spotify Desktop vs Web Player: Which Spotify Has Better Features?](https://softwarekeep.com/blogs/comparisons/spotify-desktop-vs-spotify-web-player)

[^Android_vs_WebApp]: [Native vs Web Apps: Comparing the Energy
Consumption and Performance of Android Apps
and their Web Counterparts](https://www.ivanomalavolta.com/files/papers/MOBILESoft_2023.pdf)
[^spotify_audio_quality]: [Spotify Audio Quality](https://support.spotify.com/uk/article/audio-quality/)

Commit message:

First version of abstract and small change to intro in g25_spotify.md

2025/p1_measuring_software/g25_spotify.md, after:

---
author: Julian Hirschler, Patrick Krumpl, Shantanu Jare, Sven Butzelaar, Thomas Verwaal
title: "Native vs. Web: Analyzing the Energy Consumption of Spotify Apps"
image: "https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/26/Spotify_logo_with_text.svg"
date: 28/02/2025
summary: |-
---
In this project we compare the spotify native and web app by looking at the energy consumption when playing songs. Spotify has 675 million monthly active users and thus has a significant environmental impact. From our result we conclude that the native app uses 11% more energy, possible caused by ....(add main discussion point here). Our project does have some limitations such as only using one browser and operating system. However with this project we do provide valuable insights to users and developers about the difference in energy consumption for native and web apps.

# Introduction
The way music is consumed and distributed has changed dramatically over the past few decades. The rise of digital streaming platforms such as Spotify has transformed music into an on-demand service, replacing the need to purchase physical products such as CDs or vinyl. [^music_industry_shift] 

Today, streaming generates over 67% of global music revenues [^global_music_report], confirming its dominance in the industry. With 675 million monthly active users [^spotify_report] and a market share of over 30% [^streaming_stats], Spotify is the clear leader in the music streaming market. While this shift has made music more accessible than ever, it also poses questions about its environmental impact, since streaming requires a service provider, constant network data transmission, and device power.

In recent years, web-based streaming has become more and more popular as it eliminates the need for users to install additional applications on their devices. While web applications are often favoured for their accessibility and convenience, desktop applications often offer more features to the user. In this article, we compare the energy consumption of Spotify's web and desktop applications. By analysing these differences, we aim to provide valuable insights to help users make better decisions about their streaming habits and to help developers choose between developing native and web apps.

# Methodology
This chapter describes the methodology used to compare the energy consumption of Spotify's web and desktop applications. It covers the design of the experiment and how the experiment itself was conducted, including the automation and setup of the experiment.

## Design of the experiment
The first thing to do before conducting the experiment is to design it. This involves identifying a specific use case for the application, in our case Spotify's web and desktop application. It is also important to design the experiment in such a way that it mimics actual user behaviour and is realistic.

First, we designed and conducted an experiment with both applications (desktop and web) open at the same time. We switched between the windows and randomly played exactly one song in each test run. However, the disadvantage of this type of experiment was that the other window that was open in the background affected the accuracy of the measurement. Also, playing a random song for each run has an effect on energy consumption. Thus, the data were not really normally distributed. The result of this first experiment can be found in the chapter [Results  from initial setup without closing and opening (web)app](#results-initial-setup-without-closing-and-opening-webapp).

The aim in designing the revised experiment was to minimise any bias from other applications and to focus only on the application being run. In addition, we still wanted to play more than one song to mimic realistic user behaviour, but we also wanted the data to be normally distributed across the experiment. So we had to design the individual runs to be similar, but with a certain degree of randomness built in.

For the final experiment, we decided to have 30 runs per application. The runs themselves are randomly mixed. For a single run, we first open the application (i.e. web or desktop). We then wait a few seconds for the application to fully load so that the opening has no effect on the energy measurement. We did not want to include the start of the application in this measurement as we only wanted to focus on the use case of playing music. Next, the energy measurement is started and four songs are played in random order. Each song is played for 20 seconds. Including the delays for starting and searching for the songs, a run takes about 2 minutes. After the run, the application is closed and we pause for 1 minute. So the whole experiment takes about 3 hours.


## Experiment setup
In general, testing the power consumption of applications is difficult because multiple runs can give different results. For this reason, we have chosen to perform 30 runs per application. However, there are several other factors that can affect the measurement. To reduce any bias as much as possible, we did the following before starting the experiment:

- Let the device run for at least one hour to warm it up.
- Charge the device's battery to 100% and plug it in.
- Close all applications (except the console running the automated test script).
- Disable all unnecessary background services (e.g. cloud sync, software updater, ...).
- Turn off all notifications.
- Ensure that no additional hardware is connected to the device (e.g. remove USB mouse).
- Establish a stable internet connection - preferably a wired connection.
- Turn off automatic brightness.
- Disable any power-saving modes on the device.
- Log in to the Spotify desktop and web application beforehand and ensure that the volume in both applications is set to 100%. Close applications before starting the experiment.
- Ensure that the room temperature remains approximately the same throughout the experiment.


## Experiment execution
Since it would be impossible to manually run 60 experiments without introducing bias from user input, we automated the testing process using a _Python_ script. The Spotify apps are mostly controlled via keyboard shortcuts using the _pyautogui_ library. The energy measurements are done using [EnergiBridge](https://github.com/tdurieux/EnergiBridge), which is a cross-platform energy measurement utility.[^energi_bridge]

The script starts with an initialisation and warm-up phase before actually running the experiments. During this phase, the brightness of the display and the volume of the speakers are automatically adjusted. To warm up, a simple Fibonacci sequence is computed for three minutes. Afterwards, the experiment is run as described in the [Design of the experiment](#design-of-the-experiment) chapter.

## Replication
To replicate this experiment, check out our public [GitHub repository](https://github.com/famulenz-pkrumpl/SSE_Spotify). It contains all the necessary scripts as well as instructions on how to set up the experiment.[^sse_github_repo]


# Hardware setup

For our comparison, we used the following two software applications:

| Software                     | Version        |
|------------------------------|----------------|
| Spotify - Music and Podcasts | 1.257.463.0    |
| Google Chrome                | 133.0.6943.128 |

The experiments were conducted on a DELL XPS 15 9560 with 16GB RAM and Windows 10 Pro Version 22H2.

### Hardware Settings
To have consistent experiment results, our test script automatically set the brightness and the volume of the system to the level specified in the `.env` file.
Our hardware settings were as follows:

 - Brightness 50%
 - Volume 10%
 - Internet connection via Wifi
 - Google Chrome was used as the browser


### Spotify Settings
To make sure, the experiments are as consistent as possible we adjusted the following settings in the Spotify native app:

 - Auto adjust quality should be disabled
 - Streaming quality: Normal
 - Download [quality]: Normal
 - Clear cache

And these settings should be *ENABLED* at both, the native and the web app:

 - Show the now-playing panel on click of play
 - Display short, looping visuals on tracks (Canvas)

### Spotify Accounts
For our experiment, we used two separate Spotify accounts, one for the native app and one for the web app.
This was done to prevent previously saved songs from being displayed and interfering with the experiment.
It is also important to use a non-premium Spotify account for the experiments because the audio quality of premium accounts is higher and thus, more energy will be consumed ([more information](#limitations-and-issues)).





# Results 

## Results in initial setup without closing and opening (web)app
As discussed in the methodology, our initial approach was to keep the app and the web browser open during all experiments. The results, as can be seen in Figure 1 show a plot without a normal distribution. We assume that the results with a lower energy consumption might have benefitted from internal cashing. This led us to change our setup to open and close the (web)app for every run.

![Violin Plot](../img/p1_measuring_software/g25_spotify/box_without_closing_setup.png)
*Figure 1: Violin and Box plots of energy consumption (J) without outliers.*

## Results improved setup
### Violin and Box Plots and Outliers Removal
We have plotted the data[^github] collected from the experiment into two violin and box plots, as can be seen in Figure 2. It is clear from the plots that both the results for the web and native version contain outliers. We used the Shapiro-Wilk test to check if our results are normal, the results from this test can be seen in Table 1. The p-values for the web version (2.1 × 10<sup>-8</sup>) and for the native version (5.0 × 10<sup>-4</sup>) reported by the Shapiro-Wilk are smaller than 0.05 and thus the data is not normally distributed. We therefore used z-score outlier removal to remove outliers, we had to apply this twice before the p-value of the Shapiro-Wilk test was larger than 0.05, as can be seen in Table 2. The violin and box plots for the data without outliers can be seen in Figure 3. We removed three data points, two from the web version (129.5J and 788.4J) and one from the native version (814.3J).

![Violin Plot](../img/p1_measuring_software/g25_spotify/box_outliers.png)
*Figure 2: Violin and Box plots of energy consumption (J) with outliers.*

| Shapiro-Wilk            	| W      	| p-value     	|
|-------------------------	|--------	|-------------	|
| With outliers web       	| 0.5549 	| 2.1 * 10<sup>-8</sup> 	|
| With outliers native    	| 0.8456 	| 5.0 * 10<sup>-4</sup> 	|
| Without outliers web    	| 0.9573 	| 0.3002      	|
| Without outliers native 	| 0.9882 	| 0.9809      	|

*Table 1: Values reported by Shapiro-Wilk with and without outliers.*

![Violin Plot](../img/p1_measuring_software/g25_spotify/box_no_outliers.png)
*Figure 3: Violin and Box plots of energy consumption (J) without outliers.*

### Welch's t_test and Significance
To determine the significance of our results we used Welch’s t-test, which reported a t-statistic of -9.3 and a p-value of 3.21 × 10<sup>-12</sup>. Since p < 0.05 we conclude that there is a statistically significant difference. From the t-statistic, we conclude that the native version consumes significantly more energy.

### Effect Size
To get an insight into the effect size of our experiments we computed multiple values, including the average difference, per cent change and Cohan's d, these can be seen in Table 2.

|                	| Web   	| Native 	| Difference 	|
|----------------	|-------	|--------	|------------	|
| Minimum value  	| 572.4 	| 653.2  	| 80.8       	|
| Maximum value  	| 711.4 	| 741.2  	| 29.8       	|
| Average        	| 625.3 	| 692.7  	| 67.4       	|
| Percent change 	|       	|        	| 10.78%     	|
| Cohan's d      	|       	|        	| 2.4        	|

*Table 2: Effect size analysis.*

# Discussion
The first interesting data point that can be observed is the higher energy consumption in the native desktop version of around 10.78%. There could be several reasons for this firstly, the Spotify native desktop application has many more features when compared to the web app. Some of these features are a higher audio quality, an offline mode which might require additional processing and an equalizer which leads to additional processing overhead[^spotify_WebApp_vs_Native]. In addition, the desktop version of Spotify uses a cache which further increases the energy consumption. The difference in peak power consumption is 29.8 J. This suggests that under peak workloads the power consumption is similar despite the desktop version having more features. This also ties in with the higher baseline or minimum power consumption of the native desktop by 80.8 J. This implies that these additional features require background processes to run even when the song is not played which consumes additional energy. The Android version of the app which was tested against the web version on the same mobile platform performed with better energy efficiency.  [^Android_vs_WebApp]
<!-- TODO: Mention that the desktop version has more features than the web versions, which might consume more energy. But the desktop version has caching, which does not improve it -->

<!-- TODO: also mention the paper https://www.ivanomalavolta.com/files/papers/MOBILESoft_2023.pdf and mention that on Android, it is opposite -->

# Limitations and Issues
The experiment methodology has a few issues such as being unable to cover all the use cases. The experiment only collects data for a maximum of 2 minutes per data point but this can be increased to around 5-10 minutes. The native and the web app versions have different audio qualities, video playback, and UI which might affect measurements. The used energy of the application depends a lot on the quality of the audio stream. This quality depends on various factors; one of them is the quality setting of the native app. In our experiments, we set it to *Normal*, corresponding to an AAC bitrate of approximately 96 kbit/s. It is not possible to adjust the audio quality in the web app, which means the music will be played with an AAC bitrate of 128 kbit/s for non-premium Spotify accounts and 256 kbit/s for premium accounts.[^spotify_audio_quality]

Another issue with testing the web app version was that it was done only on one browser and operating system. It could be the case that the native app runs more efficiently on a different operating system and architecture. This method also doesn't identify which features or which processes are consuming the most energy in the web app. This is a more useful insight for developing a more sustainable software product.

Furthermore not all use cases are covered in our experiments. The native app, in particular, offers more configuration options, which may further impact the results. For example, offline mode is not considered in our experiments. This mode could lead to lower energy consumption since no data transfer is required.The native app also lacks the option to turn off caching. This eventually leads to automatic downloads of some music and therefore, less data needs to be transferred and the energy consumption may decrease.

# Conclusion
Few findings can be concluded from this study. Firstly the efficiency of native desktops isn't always guaranteed over web apps on browsers such as Chrome. This is clearly shown by the results of this study. Feature availability and the presence of background jobs in desktop applications make an application like Spotify which relies on these more inefficient in its native desktop form. However, considering the difference in the peak power consumption was not very different it could be said barring these factors of higher quality and a more feature-rich environment the desktop is still pretty efficient at providing peak usage with similar energy consumption. The downside is only the resources consumed during the idling or the lower intense workloads in which case the web app is more efficient. However, this could be a more interesting case to further examine.


# Future Work
<!-- TODO: what could maybe be added here: compare more use cases, compare different browsers, compare different settings for audio quality, disable video, ...-->

---
The future work would involve looking at covering more use cases of the Spotify app. This would involve testing different features within the app and how they affect the energy consumption both in the native vs web app version. In addition for different video qualities, the energy consumption of the native vs Web App can be compared. This can be extended for different browsers as well. In addition to this comparing different desktop versions of Spotify across different operating systems and architectures can be done as well. Other similar music players such as Apple Music / Youtube Music can be examined to see how well they perform in terms of energy consumption when compared to Spotify. The song selection could also be improved currently a single song is being tested for 2 minutes. The better approach would involve testing for longer periods with songs from multiple genres. The user experience between Spotify's desktop and web app versions can be collected to see if it is worth the extra energy. Spotify might consider removing features that very few users use that might be consuming a lot of energy in the desktop or web app. The network connection also affects the energy consumption so using a web app with wired internet/wifi.
[^music_industry_shift]: [An Economic Analysis of the Effects of Streaming on the Music Industry in Response to Criticism from Taylor Swift](https://scholarworks.uni.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?params=/context/mtie/article/1154/&path_info=05_Zehr_music_streaming.pdf)
[^global_music_report]: [IFPI - Global Music Report](https://www.ifpi.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/04/GMR_2024_State_of_the_Industry.pdf)
[^spotify_report]: [2024 Earnings](https://newsroom.spotify.com/2025-02-04/spotify-reports-fourth-quarter-2024-earnings/?utm_source=chatgpt.com)
[^streaming_stats]: [Music Streaming Services Stats (2025)](https://explodingtopics.com/blog/music-streaming-stats)

[^energi_bridge]: [EnergiBridge GitHub](https://github.com/tdurieux/EnergiBridge)
[^sse_github_repo]: [GitHub repository with source code of experiment](https://github.com/famulenz-pkrumpl/SSE_Spotify)

[^spotify_WebApp_vs_Native]: [Spotify Desktop vs Web Player: Which Spotify Has Better Features?](https://softwarekeep.com/blogs/comparisons/spotify-desktop-vs-spotify-web-player)

[^Android_vs_WebApp]: [Native vs Web Apps: Comparing the Energy
Consumption and Performance of Android Apps
and their Web Counterparts](https://www.ivanomalavolta.com/files/papers/MOBILESoft_2023.pdf)
[^spotify_audio_quality]: [Spotify Audio Quality](https://support.spotify.com/uk/article/audio-quality/)
