2026/p1_measuring_software/g25_energy_compare.md, before:

---
author: Arnas Venskūnas, Dibyendu Gupta, Nick van Luijk, Sophie Schaaf
group_number: 25
title: "Energy Compare Project - Doomscrolling Reels vs. Shorts"
image: "img/g25_energy_compare/proposal_cover.png"
date: 12/02/2026
summary: |-
    Screen time is often discussed in terms of productivity and mental health, but what about energy usage? In this post, we compare the total system power while doomscrolling Instagram Reels versus YouTube Shorts.
identifier: p1_measuring_software_2026 # Do not change this
all_projects_page: "../p1_measuring_software" # Do not change this
---

## Introduction

Modern software increasingly relies on desktop-based applications that mirror web functionality. This project investigates whether native desktop apps (e.g., Spotify Desktop) consume more energy than their browser-based equivalents under identical usage scenarios (idle, active, background). The study evaluates architectural overhead and its sustainability implications.

## Methodology

## Results

## Discussion

## Conclusion

## Future work

## References

Commit message:

Added an analysis template
yadayada

2026/p1_measuring_software/g25_energy_compare.md, after:

---
author: Arnas Venskūnas, Dibyendu Gupta, Nick van Luijk, Sophie Schaaf
group_number: 25
title: "Energy Compare Project - Doomscrolling Reels vs. Shorts"
image: "img/g25_energy_compare/proposal_cover.png"
date: 12/02/2026
summary: |-
    Screen time is often discussed in terms of productivity and mental health, but what about energy usage? In this post, we compare the total system power while doomscrolling Instagram Reels versus YouTube Shorts.
identifier: p1_measuring_software_2026 # Do not change this
all_projects_page: "../p1_measuring_software" # Do not change this
---

## Introduction

Modern software increasingly relies on desktop-based applications that mirror web functionality. This project investigates whether native desktop apps (e.g., Spotify Desktop) consume more energy than their browser-based equivalents under identical usage scenarios (idle, active, background). The study evaluates architectural overhead and its sustainability implications.

## Methodology
### Analysis
#### Exploratory Analysis
Violin + Box plots, expect the shape and outliers of the data.
#### Normality
After the measurements are taken, it is important to ensure that data is normal. To measure normality, Shapiro-Wilk's test was performed. If the results do not assume normality, the points of data, deviating by more than 3 standard deviations from the mean were excluded and the Shapiro-Wilk's test was conducted again. If the results still did not indicate normality, the experiment was repeated.
#### Statistical Significance
Group differences were evaluated using the Welch’s t-test, which does not assume equal variances between groups. Statistical significance was determined using a α = 0.05.
#### Effect Size

To evaluate the practical implication of the observed results, mean difference and percent change were calculated.
Cohen’s d was computed to measure statistical effect size. Effect sizes were interpreted according to conventional benchmarks:

Small effect: d ≈ 0.2

Medium effect: d ≈ 0.5

Large effect: d ≈ 0.8

While statistical difference is unlikely to arise by chance, the practical importance will be further evaluated in the discussion section.

## Results

### Analysis
#### Exploratory Analysis
#### Normality
#### Statistical Significance
#### Effect Size

## Discussion
### Practical importance

## Conclusion

## Future work

## References
